.TH CHEOPS 6 \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
CHEOPS \- Chess Opponent Simulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
  cheops [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
Cheops (CHEss OPponent Simulator) is a fully-functional chess program
capable of human-vs-human, human-vs-computer, and computer-vs-computer
play.
.SH OPTIONS
.P
.TP
.BI "\-\-help" ""
Display a short help message and exit.
.TP
.BI "\-\-version" ""
Display version information and exit.
.SH GAMEPLAY
Once invoked, CHEOPS displays a title screen and prompts the user for
who controls each player. If a computer opponent is chosen, a list of
default static evaluation function weights is displayed.  To accept
the default values, type \fBdone\fR; otherwise, enter the number of
the weight to change. The program will then prompt for the new value.
The program will allow the user to adjust the weights until \fBdone\fR
is entered.
.P
Following player setup, the board is displayed and the game begins.
The board is represented by a simple text diagram using the standard
one-character piece abbreviations; white pieces are represented by
small letters and black pieces by capitals.  Each player makes his
move in turn; human players are prompted for their move, and computer
players move automatically. To make a move, enter the source and
destination coordinates in standard algebraic notation -- for example,
\fBg1f3\fR moves the knight at g1 to f3.  For pawn promotions, the
promotion piece must be appended -- for instance, \fBe7e8n\fR promotes
to a knight. For castling, the user may either enter the source and
destination coordinates of the king, or he may simply type \fBo-o\fR
or \fBo-o-o\fR for kingside or queenside castling, respectively. The
players may continue entering moves in this manner until a checkmate
or draw state is reached. As in regular chess, a draw occurs upon
stalemate, triple observance of the same board configuration with the
same side to move, or observance of fifty moves without a capture or
pawn advance.
.P
In addition to legal moves, the following commands are also available
as responses for human players. At the end of a game, no further moves
are possible, and one of these commands must be entered.
.TP
.BI "help" ""
display command summary
.TP
.BI "resign" ""
forfeit the match
.TP
.BI "bd" ""
redisplay the board
.TP
.BI "coords" ""
toggle display of board coordinates
.TP
.BI "reverse" ""
reverse board display (black on top to white on top, or vice versa)
.TP
.BI "think" ""
toggle display of computer ``thinking''
.TP
.BI "log" ""
display log of moves for the current game
.TP
.BI "save" ""
save the move log to a file
.TP
.BI "new" ""
start a new game (board in initial configuration with white to move)
.TP
.BI "who" ""
set players and computer stats, if applicable
.TP
.BI "quit" ""
exit the program
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to <psychonaut@nothingisreal.com>.
.SH SEE ALSO
gnuchess(6), chesstool(6), xboard(6)
.P
CHEOPS home page: http://www.nothingisreal.com/cheops/
.SH AUTHOR
Tristan Miller <psychonaut@nothingisreal.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1999, 2000, 2003 Tristan Miller.
.P
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim or modified
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and this
permission notice are preserved on all copies.
